Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 170
Unit 9 Parallel Port
Structure:
9.1 Introduction
Objectives 
9.2 Parallel Port functioning
Signals and time diagram
Port operation
IEEE1284 Modes
9.3 Troubleshooting
Preventing parallel port trouble
Configuration of parallel port device under Windows
9.4 Summary
9.5 Glossary
9.6 Terminal Questions
9.7 Answers
9.1 Introduction
You have seen in unit 4 that buses are used to transfer data from CPU to 
the peripheral devices connected to it. Port is a hardware that supports the 
communication between one computer to another computer and other 
peripheral devices. Parallel port is a device that is used to connect and 
communicate between computer and various peripherals. In parallel port,
circuit for collage, decode data and control signals are virtually eliminated 
because it sends the entire data from computer to printer simultaneously. 
Though it is simple, parallel port is not free from failures as there may be 
cable problems, static discharge damage, or continuous hardware defects, 
leading to printer disconnection. Due to the inadequacy to handle faster 
peripherals by the conventional bidirectional port, IEEE released a standard 
for bidirectional parallel peripheral interface signalling method. This method 
is named as IEEE1284 and it is useful for bidirectional parallel 
communication.
In this unit you will study about pin assignment, operation of conventional 
parallel ports and also the advances that have taken place. You will also 
study the different modes of IEEE1284 and issues related to the standard.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 171
Apart from this, the unit will discuss various troubleshooting steps that you 
could use to separate and rectify port problems. 
Objectives:
After studying this unit you will be able to:
 Describe the operation of the parallel port
 Identify the advances in the Parallel port
 Resolve the problems through troubleshooting.

9.2 Parallel port functioning
The parallel port interface is one of the simplest circuits in the PC. Figure 
9.1 illustrates a typical bidirectional port. 
Figure 9.1: Bidirectional Port
A parallel port consists of three registers:
The data register 
The control register
The status register
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 172
Address bits A0 to A9 are decoded to determine the active register among 
the three. –I/OR and –I/OW lines are used to determine whether the signals 
on the data bus are being read from or written to the specific register. 
Handshaking signals are bidirectional protocol used between sender and 
receiver to acknowledge to the sender that the data has been received. 
These signals are used to trigger the interrupt to request a new character. 
Data register, the ‘heart’ of a parallel port provides registers to read and 
write data making it a bidirectional port. It is loaded into the system by 
passing a value in it to access the printer. The bidirectional control register
is used to set condition for the CPU so that a new character can be 
requested and manage the behaviour of the port. For example, when the 
printer is ready to accept another character the control register is set to 
generate the interrupt. The status register is used to determine the status of 
the printer. 
As you know that the conventional parallel port is implemented in a series of 
three registers, when one register is used to buffer the 8 data bits, the other 
two registers handle the handshaking signals of the port. The base address 
of each port corresponds to the data register. The specific port’s status 
register is accessed through the base address with an offset value of 01h
(Identifier 2) while the control register is accessed with an offset value of 
02h (Identifier 3) 
9.2.1 Signals and Time diagram
Signal is any time varying quantity which is generated to produce the 
interrupt. All signals in the parallel port are compatible with conventional 
signal levels. Most of the computers use 25-pin sub-miniature D-type 
female connector. The D-subminiature or D-sub is a common type of 
electrical connector used particularly in computers. In D type connector D is 
the prefix for the whole series that denotes the shell size (A=15 pin, B=25 
pin, C=37 pin, D=50 pin, E=9 pin), followed by the actual number of pins, 
followed by the gender. Typical diagram of a 25-pin sub miniature is shown 
in the figure 9.2. At the printer device the parallel connection uses 36-pin 
connector. This 36-pin connector is called as Centronics type connector.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 173
Centronics mode is one of the conventional methods of transferring data to 
the printer in which it does not have handshaking mechanism. The exact 
reasoning is not clear since 11-pins of the Centronics connector will remain 
unused. The data sent by the sub miniature D-type connector is to 
responded by Centronics connector as soon as possible because the data 
will not reside in the connector for longer time. There are three types of 
signals - Data signals, handshaking signals and ground signals. The 
following section describes each signal in detail.
Figure 9.2: A typical Parallel port cable assembly
Data signals are the conductors that carry information from the parallel port 
to or from the printer or other peripheral. There are eight data lines (D0 to 
D7). These lines are located from pin 2 to pin 9. The pin 1 and pin 0 are 
occupied by ground signals. Handshaking signals are bidirectional protocol 
used between sender and receiver to acknowledge to the sender that the 
data has been received. Ground signals are used to reduce the noise 
effects in the signal. They also provide common electrical reference 
between the computer and peripheral. –Initialize signal (-INI) is initialized to 
ensure that the printer starts. It is active low so that the printer will apply 
logic 0 to initiate the start. The Select signal (SEL) is used to inform the 
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 174
computer that the component is ready to receive the data. It is active high so 
that the logic 1 indicates that the printer is online and ready. 
The computer will know that it does not have to send data when the printer 
select signal is logic 0 since it is not ready. In order to verify whether the 
data is ready on the parallel port signal –Strobe Signal (-STR) is used. It is 
used to accept the data from the peripheral and store it on the printer’s 
internal buffer for processing. In order to delay the computer from sending 
the data until the printer is ready Busy signal (BSY) is used. When a strobe 
signal is received by the peripheral, it drives the busy signal to logic 1. This 
remains at logic 1 until the printer is ready for next byte. Busy signals can 
indeterminately delay the computer when peripheral error occurs. For 
example, whenever the paper gets stuck in the printer or paper is exhausted 
or ribbon is jammed, it remains at logic 1 for a long time. Whenever the 
printer has to communicate to the computer that it is ready to receive 
another character it uses Acknowledge signal (ACK) which is active low 
signal.
9.2.2 Port operation
Printer is placed online by parallel data transfer. Initially busy signal must be 
logic 0, strobe signal and acknowledge signal must be logic 1. This is the 
indication that the printer is ready to accept one byte of data. When the
printing is initiated, it checks the status of the printer setting and the CPU 
polls the desired LPT (Line print terminal) port. LPT is the original form and 
still commonly used as parallel port interface. If the status shows ready then 
a byte of data is written to the data register and passed to the peripheral.
Data must be valid for at least 0.5 µS (microsecond) before the strobe signal 
is set to logic 0. Printer responds with the Busy signal by returning a logic 
one. This changes the status of the port. The strobe pulse must lasts for at 
least 1.0µS. Data must be held at least 0.5 µS after the strobe signal is 
passed. This timing indicates that it has enough time to receive data. It is 
the minimum requirement of the connector that the data must be valid for 
minimum of 0.5 µS below which is the time not sufficient enough to receive 
the data. Computer stops sending data now since the Busy signal is logic 1 
and previous data is still being processed. Timing diagrams are the artefacts
that are used to explore the behaviours of one or more objects throughout a 
given period of time.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 175
Figure 9.3: Typical timing diagram of a parallel port
Busy signal is set to logic 0 after the data byte is processed by the printer. 
Acknowledge signal with logic 1 is sent to the computer indicating that it is 
ready to receive the data. This is shown in the timing diagram in figure 9.3
which illustrates this theory. The printer sets busy signal high when it is 
processing a character after the select signal in the initialise mode. Once the 
busy signal is low that means when the printing of a character is done, it set 
the acknowledge signal high and request the printer for new data to send.
In the mode of printing, after the printer line receives a character for printing 
request, the character bits are put on the data line. Busy signal is tested 
repeatedly until it is found to be low, then the strobe signal is sent. The 
printer set busy signals high when the character data have been latched and 
sets it low again when the character has been processed. Once the busy 
signal is low the acknowledge signal is set high indicating the new data 
request. In the diagram you can find the three major types of signals 
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 176
responsible for the complete processing of printing a series of character 
they are initialise signals, data transfer signals and error signals. Once the 
acknowledge signal is set high in the data transfer signal a new data can 
come on the data line that is represented by new data available label in the 
data signal.
Suppose if the printer container has exhausted with paper or paper is struck 
the error signal indicates the paper out by selecting the paper out signal 
high. This paper out signal remains high until the paper is replaced or paper 
is loaded. Once the paper is loaded the paper out signal is set to low and 
select signal sends the data to the printer. Once a select signal is low the 
busy signal in the error mode will be high indicating the process of printing.
In diagram 9.3, one complete cycle can take a bit over 1mS (millisecond).
Advanced Parallel port
It is very easy to understand the appeal of a parallel port because you just 
need to plug into the 25-pin D-type connector and it is ready to run. It works 
on the concept of plug and play. The parallel port has evolved to improved
modes which are of different types like unidirectional port, “Type 1” 
bidirectional port, and “Type 3” bidirectional port. 
Unidirectional ports: this mode was used in earlier parallel port. As the 
name indicates this port is used to send data from the PC to the printer 
device. For most of the general purpose computers unidirectional port was 
enough for communication. 
“Type 1” bidirectional ports: Bidirectional ports were used to send and 
receive data from computer to printer and vice-versa. Though the 
bidirectional port is not faster than unidirectional port it came into existence 
because of its ability to send data back to the PC which made the use of the 
parallel port to connect to other peripherals besides printers. 
“Type 3” bidirectional ports: This mode attempted to increase the 
throughput of the parallel port by using Direct Memory access (DMA) 
techniques. This approach allowed the CPU to define a block of memory to 
be sent. A DMA controller takes over control from the CPU and sends and 
receives the data without the intervention of CPU which results in faster data 
transfers. This port removed the problem of slower performance of 
bidirectional port due to the intervention of CPU for the transfer of data. 
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 177
9.2.3 IEEE 1284 Modes 
By the end of 1980s it was clear that the conventional bidirectional ports 
were not adequate to handle faster peripherals. Therefore, a group of major 
PC manufacturers formed the Network Printing Alliance (NPA) which 
attempted to develop a new architecture. Later IEEE joined with NPA and 
released a standard for bidirectional parallel peripheral interface signalling 
method which was named as IEEE standard 1284. 
The IEEE 1284 standard is a standard set by IEEE and NPA for connecting 
a computer to peripheral devices over a parallel physical and electrical 
interface. IEEE allows data to flow in one direction, from computer to 
peripheral as well as it supports bi-directional data flow.
IEEE 1284 specifies 5 standard modes of operation in it, each of them 
specifying the data transfer from either printer to computer, computer to 
printer or bidirectional flow. The five modes are:
Compatibility mode: This mode is used to define the basic protocol used in 
the computers to transfer data from computer to printer. It is also called as 
Centronics mode. It was mainly designed to serve the dot matrix and older 
laser printers. In this mode, data is kept on the data signal and status is 
checked for errors and busy signals. When this is clear strobe signal is 
initiated to send the data to the printer. In this mode it carries data rate up to 
150 bytes/second at 6 meter or 20 ft. with an AB-cable or up to 150 kbps at 
10 meter or 32.8 ft. with a CC-cable (composite connector which is used to 
connect newer peripherals, wiring between the connectors in a cable and 
connecting the board to the parallel port of the PC). The drawback of this 
mode is that there is a serious problem in communicating with LAN (Local 
Area Network) adapters, removable disk drives and the newest generation 
of laser printers.
Nibble mode: this mode allows reverse data transfer to the computer. 
Combining with compatibility mode it can create bidirectional data transfer 
line. As nibble is half byte (4 bits) of the data units nibble mode is capable of 
sending 2 nibble of data from peripheral to the computer in two data transfer 
cycles. Nibble mode is best suited for printers and can operate on all PCs 
that have a parallel port. It does not have much effect on low bandwidth but 
may not support it when used with other bidirectional devices other than 
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 178
printers. This mode carries data rate up to 50 kbps at 6 meter or 20 ft. with a 
CC-cable which can be increased to up to 150 kbps at 10 meter or 32.6 ft.
Byte mode: this mode requires software drivers to disable the drivers that 
control the data signals so that data can be sent from the printer to the 
computer. The data is sent at the same speed as sent from the computer to 
the printer. This mode is able to send one byte (8 bits) of data transfer and 
when combined with compatibility mode can create bidirectional data 
transfer line. It carries data rate up to 500 kbps at 10 meter or 32.8 ft. with 
CC-cables.
ECP mode: Extended Capability Port mode is an advanced mode for 
communication between printers and scanners which allows data 
compression for images and FIFO facility for items in queue. ECP provides 
high performance bidirectional path between computer and the peripheral. 
And supports data rates up to 2 to 4 MB per second. The features of ECP 
mode are:
Run length encoding (RLE) data compression for host system’s LPT port.
FIFO buffers for both forward and backward channels.
Feature of channel addressing is used for multifunction logical devices
within a single physical device such as printer/fax/modem devices. For 
example, In a printer/fax/modem device, where a single parallel port is 
connected to a peripheral device using channel address software driver of
ECP mode, you can assign a new channel to the modem while the printer is 
still busy in printing a high resolution image. 
This mode carries data rate up to 500 kbps at 1 Mbps at 6 meter or 20ft. or 
10 meter or 32.8 ft. with CC-cables.
EPP mode: Enhanced Parallel Port mode was designed to provide a highperformance parallel interface which could be used with the standard 
interface. The EPP mode uses one ISA I/O cycle that transfers data 
between the computer and the peripheral devices. This allows data transfer 
rate at the speed of 500 KB to 2MB per second, depending on the speed of 
the slowest interface. The EPP mode is bi-directional. and suitable for 
network adapters, data acquisition, portable hard drives, and other devices 
that need speed.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 179
It uses single instruction to transfer data to or from the PC. Moreover, the 
EPP protocol provides a high degree of coupling between the peripheral 
driver and the peripheral devices. 
IEEE issues
While IEEE might be appealing, there are some serious considerations to be 
kept in mind while dealing with it. You must specifically ensure that you 
have IEEE 1284 complaint parallel port, cable and peripheral devices like 
printer, tape drives, hard drive and so on. The main problem in using IEEE 
port is using the specific printer cable with older dot matrix printer. To benefit 
from IEEE you must have at least IEEE 1284 cable and a device with 
significant memory capacity such as a laser printer. 
The computer must be able to determine the features of the peripheral that 
is connected to it so that it can choose the mode of standard. Therefore, a 
method called negotiation was developed to determine these factors. 
Negotiation is a series of events that exists on the parallel port interface and 
used to determine the requirement of type of mode for the device. For older 
device compatibility, mode is selected for operation as it does not respond 
to negotiation. 
Self Assessment Questions
1. ______________ is a device that is used to connect and
communicated between computer and printer.
2. Data registers are called as ______________.
3. ______________ is any time varying quantity which is generated to
produce the interrupt.
4. IEEE joined with ______________ released a standard for bidirectional
parallel port.
9.3 Troubleshooting
Though the parallel port is a very simple device it can throw some huge
challenges. Although the easiest way would be to replace a port whenever 
there is a problem in it, the following tips might help you to detect any 
problem in the mother port before you do so. There are three options before 
you: 
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 180
South Bridge chip that supports the parallel port can be replaced. Though 
this can be economical it is not common practical solution.
Set the jumpers to disable the faulty parallel port and install a multi 
expansion I/O slot to take its place. This offers a cheap, fast fix for a 
defective parallel port. 
Motherboard can be replaced. This is a simple but very expensive option. 
This is the last solution for any technician when the parallel port is defective.
9.3.1 Preventing parallel port trouble
Though the parallel port is very a simple device it is important for you to 
address some common issues that manifest themselves regularly. The 
following points could be considered before identifying the problem: 
Cable: As a cheap or damaged cable can cause serious problem it is 
essential that you ensure that the cable length is less than 6 ft. When you 
suspect a cable problem try connecting a different cable or a good known 
cable. In most cases using the IEEE 1284 cable will solve the problem.
Port mode: you need to choose a right mode for the right device. Not all the 
parallel ports operate well on ECP or EPP modes. In case of defects or 
problems in the printer try changing the mode to compatibility mode or any 
standard mode in the CMOS setup. In high end devices you need to specify 
the setting as ECP or EPP to get full functionality of the port.
Hardware conflicts: It is very common to have a conflict if the system uses 
second LPT port (LPT2) for IRQ5 because it is mostly used up by sound 
boards. The line print terminal (LPT) was designed to operate text printer. If
you have two or more LPT ports in the system, then you need to configure 
the sound boards to use another IRQ or to remove the sound board entirely.
Printer driver conflicts: This problem is common when you use certain 
parallel port devices such as Iomega Zip drives, SyQuest SyJet drives etc.
The parallel port receives the special reserved non printable characters by 
these drives. This signals the drive that the next data is for the drive and not 
for the printer. This situation can cause conflicts between the drivers and 
each unit might appear like a defective system. Therefore, by using one LPT 
port for the parallel port drive and another LPT port for the printer will 
resolve the above mentioned conflict. 
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 181
Printer monitoring software: printer monitoring may also cause conflict in 
drivers. Some printers have status drivers that monitor the printer status. 
When such printers are connected to the pass-through port of the parallel 
port, they may disable the printer monitoring drive and also corrupt the data 
resulting in system problem. Therefore, you should disable the status 
communication which does not affect the printing. 
9.3.2 Configuration of parallel port device under Windows 
There are some common issues that arise while configuring the parallel port 
device under Windows which are categorized as follows: 
Cabling problems: suitable cable must be used for the parallel port and the 
device. Try to connect the device directly to the parallel port if you have 
switch box or pass-through type of connector between the port and the 
device. You could also try to accommodate the additional device if you have 
any other peripherals device other than printer by setting up the additional 
parallel port on your computer. 
Port disabled: check the status of the parallel port by rebooting the PC and 
selecting the CMOS setup. LPT port must be enabled and particular IRQ 
must be assigned to the port. For example IRQ7 for LPT 1 or IRQ 5 for LPT 
2. In the Bios listing IRQ5 is available and the default IRQ is used for sound
card. If the sound card is not used the network card and LP2 are often set to
the IRQ5 as it support the secondary parallel port devices. IRQ7 is typically
for primary parallel port. If the parallel port is not used then IRQ7 can be
assigned to another LPT1 device or any primary device.
Port configured improperly: In CMOS setup, check the parallel port mode
to ensure that compatibility mode or standard mode is set for basic printers 
and high end printers which may need ECP or EPP mode to function 
properly. 
Disable any status monitors: you need to disable any status monitoring 
software on the system. Also, Windows startup folder needs to be checked
during the boot time. You need to disable real-mode software by remarking 
out the offending command line in CONFIG.SYS or AUTOEXEC.BAT.
Wrong mode set for parallel port device: you should ensure that the 
printer is not set to plug-and-play mode.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 182
Check and correct any IRQ conflicts: Check and correct IRQ conflicts. 
You need to verify that a particular IRQ allocated to a parallel port is not 
used by any other device. This kind of setting is a problem with sound board 
and IRQ 5. You need to remove or reconfigure the device which has 
conflicts. For example, consider a SyQuest drive. If you have no SCSI 
controllers listed, then it indicates that a SyQuest Windows driver is
prevented from loading, indicating an IRQ conflict. 
Check and remove any similar device drivers: whenever you upgrade a 
parallel port device ensure that the older driver is removed so that there is 
no interference with the new device drivers. For example, if you have 
upgraded your Windows with SyQuest Windows’s parallel port drivers and 
another removable media device such as tape backup running a device 
drive on older Windows, this will compete with the newer drive and prevent 
the SyQuest drive from installing properly under Windows. In that case you 
need to remove or uninstall any device drivers or software related to old 
parallel port device and then reinstall the new device drivers. 
Activity 1:
How will you troubleshoot when you hear a beep code or see a POST 
error indicating a parallel port?
Hint: Refer the concept of symptom of parallel port in the book on 
troubleshooting, maintaining, and repairing PCs by S. J. Bigelow
Self Assessment Questions
5. State whether the following statements are true or false.
a. There will be serious problem in the port if you use a cheap cable.
b. You should enable the status monitor software when there is a
problem in the port.
6. ECP stands for ______________.
9.4 Summary
Parallel port is a device which is used to connect and communicate between 
computer and other peripheral devices. Parallel port interface is one of the 
simplest and straight forward circuits in the PC. It consists of three registers 
which perform specific functions: they are data register, status register and 
control register.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 183
While accessing the printer, the system CPU loads the port data register 
with the value to be passed. In this unit you studied the different types of 
signals which are responsible for transferring the data from the computer to 
the peripheral device which is mostly a printer. You also discussed the 
operation of the parallel port with the help of different kinds if signals which 
have been represented with the help of parallel port timing diagram. Apart 
from these, a comparison between the various parallel port modes such as 
unidirectional port and bidirectional ports were made in this unit. 
You have not only come to know the standard used in new peripheral 
device and its different mode components but also discussed how to 
prevent the parallel port from experiencing any problem, but if problems to 
occur then how to troubleshoot in the Windows configuration.
9.5 Glossary
Term Description
LPT port Line print terminal is the original form and still commonly 
used as parallel port interface
Centronics 
mode
This is one of the conventional methods of transferring data 
to the printer in which it does not have handshaking 
mechanism. therefore we need to react fast to the data send 
by the host
Handshaking 
signals
They are bidirectional protocol used between sender and 
receiver to acknowledge the sender that the data is received
Nibble One nibble is equal to 4 bits or half byte
Byte One byte is equal to 8 bits or double the nibble
D-type female
connector
The D-subminiature or D-sub is a common type of electrical 
connector used particularly in computers. In D type connector 
D is the prefix for the whole series that denotes the shell size 
(A=15 pin, B=25 pin, C=37 pin, D=50 pin, E=9 pin), followed 
by the actual number of pins, followed by the gender.
9.6 Terminal Questions
1. Explain the operation of the parallel port in detail.
2. Differentiate between different nodes of IEEE 1284 standard.
Understanding PC and Troubleshooting Unit 9
Manipal University Jaipur B1416 Page No.: 184
3. How will you resolve the problem of Windows configuration through
troubleshooting?
9.7 Answers
Self Assessment Questions
1. Parallel Port
2. Bidirectional
3. Signal
4. NPA
5. a) True
b) False
6. Extend Capability Port
Terminal Questions
1. Refer sec 9.2.2 Port Operation
2. Refer sec 9.2.3 IEEE 1284 modes
3. Refer sec 9.3 Troubleshooting
References:
 Trouble shooting, maintaining and repairing PCs, the 1st author in PC
hardware, 5th edition by Stephen J. Bigelow, Tata McGraw Hill
Publications, 2001
 Upgrading and repairing PCs, 15th anniversary edition by Scott Mueller,
Que publishing, 2003
E-References:
 http://eetd.lbl.gov/EA/Reports/39466/
 http://www.microsoft.com/windowsxp/using/setup/learnmore/russel_
02march25.mspx
 http://www.tech-faq.com/configuring-power-management.html
 http://www.microsoft.com/windowsxp/using/setup/learnmore/russel_
02march25.mspx
 http://courses.engr.illinois.edu/ece390/books/labmanual/parallelcomm.html
 http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/0,,sid9_gci213469,00.html
 http://ckp.made-it.com/ieee1284.html